The City and the Pillar One winter afternoon. on Fifth Avenue, Jim saw Lieutenant Shaw looking rather wistfully at a display of Christmas toys in the window of F. A. 0. Schwartz's. 'Ronnie!' 'Jim!' They shook hands warmly. Shaw had been at sea in the Atlantic. He was now on leave, living at the Harding Hotel. Would Jim like a drink? Yes. The suite in the Harding was vast, with rococo mirrors and spindly gold-encrusted furniture. Shaw ordered a bottle of Scotch and then they stared at one another, each wondering how to begin. At last Shaw remarked that a lot of water had gone under the bridge since they last met. Jim agreed. Then the conversation stopped for a long time until Shaw said, 'Are you living alone?' Jim nodded. 'I worked pretty hard all summer, I don't really know anybody yet.' 'You're better off playing the field. I know I am. Ideally, of course, a relationship i's best, but then how many people are capable of deep feeling? Practically none.' Jim put an end to that familiar dirge. 'How's the Navy?' Shaw shrugged. 'I've had to be careful. But then I've always had to be careful. By the way, what're you doing tonight? I've been invited to a faggot party, very chichi. I'll take you. It can be your coming-out party in New York. They’ll all be there.' Jim was surprised at how little Shaw seemed to care for appearances. In the old days he would never have gone to such a party. But now he was indifferent, even defiant. The party was given by Nicholas J. Rolloson, heir to a notorious American fortune. Rolly, as he was known, had two passions, modern art and the military. Both were were represented in his apartment overlooking Centra1 Park. Paintings by Chagall and Dufy hung on stark white walls. Mobiles tinkled from the ceiling. A huge Henry Moore nude dominated one end of a long drawing-room in which at least one chair resembled a wrecked armadillo. Throughout these start-ling rooms a full company of soldiers, sailors and marines wandered, awed by their surroundings if not by Rolly and his friends, who were perfectly familliar to them. There was a hush when Shaw entered. Although there were other famous men at the party, painters, writers, composers, athletes, even a member of Congress, Shaw was most glamorous of all. Eyes watched his every move. He was a legend here, and that made him entirely happy. Rolly welcomed them enthusiastically. He wore a scarlet Mazer with a crest; as he moved, breasts jiggled beneath a pale yellow silk shirt. The handshake was predictably damp. 'My dears, how lovely of you to come! I was so afraid you wouldn't, Ronnie, and I would have died of disappointment, but now my evening is made, but absolutely made! Now come with me. Everybody's just about out of their minds to meet you.' Shaw was borne away, and Jim was left on his own. A waiter gave him a Martini. Cocktail in hand, Jim went exploring, somewhat excited by the servicemen, conscripts in Rolloson's army. In a corner of the dining-room, Jim was hailed by an effeminate man with a hairpiece. 'Come on over, baby. Join the party.' Without alternative, Jim sat down on the couch between the hairpiece and a set of bifocals. Opposite sat a grey-haired man and a bald young man. They had been talking earnestly and both the grey-haired man and the bifocals were irritated at being interrupted. 'You came with Shaw, didn't you?' asked the hairpiece. Jim nodded. 'Are you an actor?' 'A tennis player.' Jim ground out the phrase in his deepest voice. 'Oh, how thrilling! An athlete! I adore body men,' said the bifocals. 'Teutonic and primitive, not like those of us who are simply frustrated and inhibited by a society grown too complex to understand. This young man is the true archetype, the original pattern of which we are neurotic distortions.' The bifocals examined Jim as if he were sO'me sort of moderately interesting experiment. The grey-haired man objected. 'Why are the rest of us necessarily the result of a distortion? In any case, you are being taken in by an appearance. We don't know his reality. He could be most neurotic of ail. By the way,' [155 he turned to Jim with a smile, 'we speak of you not as yourself but as a symbol. We're not being impertinent.' 'But there is something,' said the bald man, 'in this Teutonic theory. In Germany, isn't it the army, the athletes, the most virile men, who are homosexual, or at least bisexual ? And God knows Germany is primitive enough. On the other hand, in America and in England we find that effeminacy is one of the signs of the homosexual, and of course neurosis.' 'Five years ago we might have thought that true,' said bifocals. 'But I'm not so sure now. Of course there have always been normal-appearing men who were homosexual but never or seldom practiced, while the other type (what you call Teutonic) was not so much in evidence and we knew very little about them and thought they were just trade, you know, the truck driver who enjoyed being had but pretended that he was really interested in women and money. But I think the war has caused a great change. Inhibitions have broken down. AU sorts of young men are trying out aU sorts of new things, away from home and familiar taboos.' 'Everyone is by nature bisexual,' said the grey-haired man. 'Society, early conditioning, good or bad luck depending on how you were told to look at it -determine the result. Nothing is "right" Only denial of instinct is wrong.' Across the room, Shaw motioned for Jim to join him. Jim excused himself. Shaw and Rolly were surrounded by sailors who regarded Jim jealously as he joined them. 'I thought you looked bored with those intellectuals,' said Shaw. 'Who are they?' asked Jim. 'Well, the grey-haired one is a professor at Columbia and the one with glasses is a journalist-you'd know his name if I could remember it -and the other one is a perfect bitch,' said Rolly, patting his thick lustrous hair. 'They were probably talking politics. So dreary! I say, why worry? Let them eat cake and all .that sort of thing. I mean, after all, really, isn't live and let live the best policy?' Jim agreed that indeed it was and Roily pinched his thigh. Shaw was suddenly carried off by the sailors and Jim was left with Rolly, trapped. 'I understand from Ronnie that you're a tennis player. Now I think that's terribly exciting . . . I mean to be an athlete and work out of doors. I've always thought that if I had my life to live over, which fortunately I haven'1t, I would have spent more time al fresco, doing things. As it is, I do nothing. You know I do nothing, don't you? I hope you don't hate me. Everyone's so snobbish about working these days. It's the Communists, they're everywhere, saying people must produce. Well, I say that there must be somebody who knows how to appreciate what's produced. Which is why I'm really quite a useful member of society. After all I keep money in circulation and ·other people get it and I do so believe in everyone haV'ing a good time… Oh, there's that button marine, isn't he something ? He was had five times last Sunday and still went to Mass, so he told me.' Jim looked at this celebrity, who turned out to be a rather tired-looking young man in uniform. 'You know, I loathe these screaming pansies,' said Rolly, twisting an emerald and ruby ring. 'I have a perfect weakness for men who are butch. I mean, after all, why be a queen if you like other queens, if you follow me? Luck<rly, nowadays everybody's gay, if you know what I mean ... literally everybody! So different when [157 I was a girl. Why, just a few days ago a friend of mine . . . welt I wouldn’t go so far as to say a friend, actually I think he's rather sinister.anyway this acquaintance was actually keeping Will Jepson, the boxer! Now, I mean, really, when things get that far, things h.ave real1y gone far!Jim agreed that things had indeed gone far. Rolly rather revoLted him but he recognized that he meant to be kind and that was a good deal. 'My. isn't it crowded in here? I love for people to enjoy themselves! I mean the right kind of people who appreciate tihis sort of thing. You see, I've become a Catholic.' Jim took this information in his stride. 'It started with Monsignor Sheen, those blue eyes! But of course I needed Faith. I had to know jUS't where I'm going when I shuffle off this mortal thing, and the Catholic Church is so lovely, with that cosy grandeur that I adore. One feels so safe with the rituals and everything and t1hose robes! Well, there just isn't anything to compare with them. They have really the most beautiful ceremonies in the world. I w.as in St Peter's once for Easter-I think it was Easter-anyway, the Holy Father came riding in on a go1den throne wearing the triple tiara and The most beautiful white robes you've ever seen and the Cardinals all in red and the incense and the beautiful marble and gold statues ... absolutely yummy! Anyway, then and there I became a Catholic. I remember turning to Dario Alarimo (he was a dear friend of mine of an extremely old Neapolitan family, his father was a Duke and he would have been a Duke, too, but I believe he was killed in the war because he was a Fascist, though all the best people were Fascists in those days, even though we all realized that Mussolini was hardly chic). 158] What was I talking about? I was about to make a point. Oh, yes, about becoming a Catholic. So I turned to Dario and I said, “This is the most splendid thing I've ever seen," and he turned to me and said, "Isn't it, Rolly ?" All my friends call me Rolly. I hope you will, too. So, right after that I took instruction. Oh, my poor head! It was so difficult. There was so much to memorize and I've a perfectly wretched memory, but I did it. I don't like to seem carping or to be finding fault with the Church but if they would on1y cut out all that memory work, things would be a lot simpler and they might pick up all sorts of reaHy nice people, not that I'm implying they don't already have the best people. Good evening, Jimmy, Jack, Allen. Enjoying yourselves? But as I was saying, except for that awful memory work at the start, it's been thrilling. I go to confessional once a month and I even get to the Sunday morning Mass, the one at ten, and really I think I'm something of a model convert. 'Of course it will probably be years before I die. I certainly hope it will be years. But when I go, I want to be prepared. I've picked out the nicest crypt at the Church of St Agnes in Detroit. That's where my family makes those awful motor-cars. And I shall be buried there. I expect the Cardinal wiU officiate at the funeral. He better, considering the money I'm leaving them in my will. Going so soon, Rudy? Thank you, good-night. I understand that the Pope is thinking quite seriously of giving me a decoration for the good deeds I've done. I've given them rather a bit of cash, you know. It's the only way to defeat Communism . 'I do hope all go to heaven after doing so many good works on earth. I think sin is terribly fearsome, don't you? It's practically impossible not to sin a little, but I think it's the big sins; that are the ones that can't be forgiven, like murdering people. A few lies, white dies, and an occasional infidelity, that's real1y the extent of my personal falls from Grace. I have such hopes for the afterlife. I see it as a riot of color! And the angels why!look like marines. Too gay! The party is going well, don't you think?' Jim agreed, weary of the flood of ta'1k. 'If you'll excuse me I must make my rounds. The work of a hostess is never done. You wouldn't like to spend the night, would you?' As Jim started to say no, Rolly giggled. 'So few people do any more, that's one of the horrors of age. Well, I've enjoyed this little chat with you immensely, and I hope you'll come by some evening when we can have a quiet dinner together.' Rolloson patted Jim on the buttocks and plunged into his menagerie. Jim found Shaw drunk and surrounded by sailors. Tm going home.' 'But it's early. Come-on, what you need is a drink.' 'I'll ca'll you up in a day or so.' Jim departed. It was a relief for him to breathe the fresh air of the street. Winter passed swiftly. Jim-saw Shaw occasionally and Shaw was friendly and amusing and introduced him to a number of people who had money and nothing to do. There were many different homosexual worlds in New York, and each usually h'ad some knowledge ·of the others. There was also the half-world where hereto-and homosexual mingled with a certain degree of frankness; this was particularly true of theatrical and literary groups. But in the highest society,· the homosexual wore a stylized mask in order to move gracefully, and often unconvincingly, among admiring women who were attracted to him because his understanding was as great 16o] as his demands were few. Occasionally two homosexuals might meet in the great world. When they did, by a quick glance they acknowledged one .another and, like amused conspirators, observed t!he effect each was having. •It was a form of freemasonry. From all over the country homosexuals had converged on New York. Here, among the indifferent millions, they could be as unnoticed by the enemy as they were known to one another. Yet for every one who lived openly with men, there were ten who married,' 'had children, lived a discreet, ordinary life, only occasionally straying into bars or Turkish baths, particularly at five o’clock, that hour between office and home when the need for relief is particularly urgent. These masculine, rather tense men appealed to Jim, who disliked the other sort he met through Sh.aw. Yet he learned a great deal from the bold homosexuals. Like jazz musicians and dope addicts, they spoke in code. The words 'fairy' and 'pansy' were considered to be in bad taste. They preferred to say that a man was 'gay', while someone quite effeminate was a 'queen'. As for 't'hose manly youths who offered themselves for seduction while proclaiming their heterosexuality, they were known as 'trade', since they usually wanted money. Trade was regarded with great suspicion; in fact, it was a part of the homosexual credo that this year's trade is next year's competition. Jim was thought to be trade by most of Shaw's friends, and inaccessible trade at that. AN during the winter Jim saw a good deal of the Rolloson world. Though he was repelled by the queens, he had no other society. Furtive encounters with young married men seldom led to .anything. For a time, -he hoped that if he saw enough of the queens, he might begin to like their society and be happy in it. But this [161 was not possible, and so when Shaw went back on active duty, Jim dropped out of the gay world, preferring to haunt those bars where he could find young men like himself. On an impulse one afternoon, Jim telephoned Maria Verlaine's hotel and to his surprise he found her in. She invited him into come to see her. Maria embraced him at the door: 'You look so welt!' She led him into the sitting room. Her eyes were 1luminous; she was vivacious; she laughed often. Then Jim noticed that her hands shook as she smoked her cigarette, and that she was iU at ease. He wondered willy, but she gave him no clue. ',Where have I been? Welt let me see. Everywhere. Nowhere. The summer in Maine. Then Jamaica. Bu't New York is the centre where I touch 'base between excursions.' 'You haven't been happy. have you?' Jim was direct. 'What a question!' She laughed, eyes not meeting his. 'It's ,hard to say what being happy is. Absence of pain? In that case, -I have been happy. I suffer no pain. Feel nothing.' But she mocked herself as she spoke. 'Then you still haven't got what you want?' 'No, I haven't. I live entirely on the surface, from day to day.' She was sudden[y grave. 'Will you ever find him ? ' 'I don't know. Perhaps not. 'I'm not young. I won't live for ever. I simply go on. An'd wait.' 'I wonder if any man wants the complete thing that you do. I don't think men are capable of so much feeling; that's why so many prefer one another to women.' He was immediately sorry that he had said this. Yet he was convinced .that it was the truth. Maria laughed. 'You don't 1leave us much hope, do you? One must be what one is. Besides, at times I 'have been very happy.' 162] 'Maybe we'd aH be better off just having friends and forget about lovers.' Maria smiled. 'That seems like such a waste, doesn't it?' They talked then of other things until it was twilight and Jim got up to leave. Maria had told h4m that she was expecting a friend at five. TU see you again. Soon,' she said. 'Soon.' said Jim. They did not embrace when he left. Jim went straight to a Times Square bar frequented by dsoldiers and sailors. He studied the room carefully, like a general surveying the terrain of 'battle. Then he selected his objective: a tall Army Lieutenant with 'broad shoulders, dark hair, blue eyes. Jim squeezed in beside him and ordered a drink. Jim's leg touched 'the Lieutenant's leg. a hard muscular leg which returned the pressure. 'You in the service?' asked the Lieutenant. His voice was slow, deep, Far Western. 'Yeah, I was in the Army, too.' 'What outfit?' They exchanged information. The Lieutenant had served with the infantry during the invasion of North Africa. He was now stationed in the South as an instructor. 'You live around here?' Jim nodded. 'I got a room downtown.' 'I sure wish I had a place. I got to stay on a sofa with this married cousin. 'That sounds pretty uncomfortable.' 'It sure is.' 'You could,' said Jim, as though he were thinking it over, 'stay at my place. There's plenty of room.' 